

USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


NAME
     usage - installing and using MINIX

DESCRIPTION
     This manual page describes the installation  and  use  of  MINIX  from  a
     System  Administrators point of view.  It contains an installation guide,
     instructions on how to do the initial configuration and some other  info.
     Please  read  this  document entirely before attempting to install MINIX.
     The installation  steps  are  in  the  proper  order,  but  not  all  the
     information  you  may  need  is  presented  at  the  right moment.  Other
     detailed information that may be useful can be found in boot(8), hier(7),
     and in dosminix(8) if you run MINIX under DOS.

  1. MINIX UNDER DOS
     Installation of MINIX to run under DOS is a nonevent.  Chances  are,  you
     are reading this manual page from an already running MINIX system, but if
     not then the setup goes like this:

     Unpack the DOSMINIX.ZIP file using one of the popular ZIP utilities, such
     as PKZIP or WinZIP.  Next reboot Windows and hit F8 just when you see the
     "Booting Windows" message.  From the menu that  appears  choose  "Command
     prompt  only",  or  if that doesn't work "Safe mode command prompt only".
     Under Windows Me you can use a startup disk to  boot  the  PC  into  DOS.
     Move to the directory containing the MINIX files and type:

          boot minix.mnx

     Type '=' and presto, you are running MINIX.  Most of  the  rest  of  this
     manual,  which  deals  mainly  with  running  MINIX  in  a true hard disk
     partition, does not apply to  you.   Your  system  is  already  installed
     completely,  with all binaries and sources present, so all the talk about
     getting MINIX on your disk can be skimmed over.  Pay attention again when
     the  focus shifts to the configuration of the system.  Section 9 is where
     this happens first.  (The main challange to  a  DOS  installation  is  to
     figure out which parts of the installation manual do not apply.)

  2. REQUIREMENTS
     The minimum system MINIX can be installed on comfortably is an IBM  PC/AT
     or  PS/2  with a 286 processor, 2 MB memory, a 720 kb diskette drive, and
     35 MB free space on an AT, ESDI, or SCSI hard disk (the latter controlled
     by  an  Adaptec  1540.)   MINIX  for the 386 (MINIX-386 for short) can be
     installed on a machine with at least a 386sx processor, 3 MB  memory  and
     at least 35 MB of disk space.

     The minimum system MINIX can be installed  on  uncomfortably  is  an  IBM
     PC/XT with 640 kb memory.  MINIX-386 can more or less run in 2 MB memory.
     See sections 16 and 17 on "low memory" issues.





                                                                             1



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


  3. MINIX INSTALLATION BACKGROUND
     The objective of the installation is to create a partition on  your  disk
     and  to put MINIX into it.  MINIX really requires at least two partitions
     however, so the single "primary" partition is split  into  two  or  three
     subpartitions.   The  s0  subpartition will contain the root file system,
     the  s1  subpartition  may  optionally  contain  swapspace,  and  the  s2
     subpartition  will  contain  the  /usr  file  system.  What Windows calls
     "drives", i.e C:, D:, E:, MINIX calls "file systems".  MINIX does not use
     drive  letters,  but  requires  that  one  file  system is made a part of
     another file system by "mounting" one on  the  other.   The  "root"  file
     system  is  always present and starts with the directory "/", the root of
     the directory tree.  The root file system  contains  a  few  programs  in
     /bin,  device  files  in  /dev, and configuration files in /etc.  This is
     just enough to get the  system  started.   MINIX  will  soon  extend  its
     directory  tree by mounting a file system on the /usr directory.  What is
     henceforth known as the /usr file system contains all MINIX  programs  in
     /usr/bin,  file system sources in /usr/src, etc, etc.  The ROOT.MNX image
     contains the complete MINIX root file system, but  USR  contains  just  a
     small  subset  of  the  /usr  file  system, with just enough utilities to
     install MINIX.  The complete /usr  file  system  is  split  up  into  the
     USR.TAZ,  SYS.TAZ  and  CMD.TAZ archives that are installed later to fill
     /usr.

     Let's suppose your first hard disk, which has device name /dev/c0d0,  has
     Windows already present in the first primary partition (/dev/c0d0p0), and
     some free space left after that.  After MINIX is installed in  that  free
     space the disk will look like this:

         /dev/c0d0        Whole hard disk #0
         /dev/c0d0p0      Windows C: drive
         /dev/c0d0p1      MINIX primary partition
         /dev/c0d0p1s0    MINIX root partition
         /dev/c0d0p1s1    MINIX swap partition (optional)
         /dev/c0d0p1s2    MINIX /usr partition

     /dev/c0d0 is the sum of a partition table, /dev/c0d0p0  and  /dev/c0d0p1.
     Likewise  is  /dev/c0d0p1  the sum of a subpartition table, /dev/c0d0p1s0
     and /dev/c0d0p1s2.  Read the "DEVICES" sections for more  information  on
     MINIX devices.

  4. INSTALLATION
     You can install MINIX automatically  or  manually  as  described  in  the
     sections  below.   The  end  result  is the same, but manual installation
     allows one to deviate from the preconfigured choices.  You  may  wish  to
     read  the  manual pages of the programs used below before you start.  You
     may especially want to read boot(8) if your  machine  is  different  from
     what the majority buys, because you may need to set a few boot parameters
     to configure drivers.  To do this type ESC to get  to  the  Boot  Monitor
     prompt, set the appropriate variables, use save to store the settings and
     menu to continue where you left off.


                                                                             2



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


     To install the system you need two diskettes: a  bootable  root  diskette
     and  a  diskette  full  of  binaries to use as /usr.  These diskettes are
     named ROOT and USR.  These two diskettes may also be combined on a single
     high density diskette.  In that case the USR part is on the p2 partition.

     Insert the ROOT diskette, boot the machine and type '=' to the menu.  The
     MINIX  kernel  is  loaded  and  takes  control when you see the copyright
     banner.  After loading the root diskette into the RAM disk  you  will  be
     asked  to finish the name of the device to mount on /usr.  Type fd0p2 for
     a diskette that contains both ROOT and USR, otherwise replace ROOT by USR
     and type fd0.  Login as root.

  5. AUTOMATIC INSTALLATION
     Before starting the installation, you must either have a  free  partition
     available or have at least 35 MB not in any partition so you can create a
     MINIX partition.

     Type setup to start the installation script.  First it offers to  install
     a  national keyboard map.  The names should be clear, except for us-swap,
     which swaps the CTRL and CAPS LOCK keys of a standard US  style  keyboard
     for  people who believe that the natural place of CTRL is next to A.  The
     default suggested between [ and ] is the US standard keyboard.

     The next thing to do is to make a partition, for this you are placed in a
     partition  table  editor named part.  This partition table editor is very
     easy to use (in the author's opinion), but you  will  probably  hate  it.
     You  can  move all over the place with the arrow keys, change values, and
     make a mess of your partition table real  quick.   So  if  you  get  into
     trouble,  type  'q'  to  quit,  'n' to not write the table, and RETURN to
     start over.  Use the '?' key to get help.

     With the '+' and '-' keys you can select the disk device to  install  on,
     probably  /dev/c0d0, the first hard disk.  Type 'r' to load the partition
     table of the selected disk.  Either create one new partition by modifying
     a partition marked "None", or reuse an existing partition by changing its
     type to "MINIX" (hex code 81).  DO NOT use part  to  shrink  an  existing
     partition!   It  will  destroy all data in that partition.  MINIX needs a
     partition of at least 20 MB, but not larger than 128 MB (MINIX-86)  or  1
     GB (MINIX-386).  The system needs 35 MB in compiled state.

     The script then wants to know the name of the partition  you've  created.
     The  partition  name  is  probably still visible on the screen.  Combined
     with the drive name you have to type c0d0p1, c0d2p0 or something.

     The next question is the amount of swapspace  you  want  to  give  MINIX.
     There will be a suggested value based on the amount of memory your system
     has.  If you have more then enough memory then don't  bother  with  swap.
     MINIX  doesn't  handle  it  very  well  yet, or ever, only memory starved
     systems need it so that make world can run.



                                                                             3



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


     The new partition table is reloaded into the disk  driver,  and  the  new
     MINIX  partition  is carved up into two or three subpartitions, a 1440 kb
     root, maybe some amount of swap, and the rest for /usr.

     After  making  /usr,  it  is  immediately  put  to  use  to  replace  the
     installation /usr file system so that you can remove the USR diskette and
     insert the ROOT diskette (unless they are one and the  same).   The  root
     file system is filled with the contents of the ROOT diskette and slightly
     patched up to work on the hard disk (/etc/fstab.)

     You can now skip the next section and move to "TESTING", but  it  may  be
     instructive to read it anyway.

  6. MANUAL INSTALLATION
     The instructions that follow are at a very low level and require  you  to
     be very careful.  The big advantage is that you know precisely what tools
     have been used and how everything works.  The disadvantage  is  that  you
     may easily make a mistake that either forces you to start over if you are
     lucky, or wipes out the contents of your hard disk if you are not.   Only
     if  you  really  want  to  do something different should you use a manual
     installation.  Slavishly following the steps shown below will  only  make
     you end up with the same result as an automatic installation.

     Run part to make partitions to load the system into.  The best  thing  to
     do  is  to  make one large primary partition of type "MINIX" and to carve
     this partition up into three subpartitions for root, swap and /usr.   The
     assumption  is  that  you will use the second partition on the first hard
     disk, /dev/c0d0p1, and that c0d0p1s0 is the root  subpartition,  c0d0p1s1
     is  swap and c0d0p1s2 is /usr.  If you want to use the first partition on
     the  second  hard  disk  for  instance,  then   substitute   c0d1p0   and
     c0d1p0s[012]  for  the  above.  See the section on devices below, and the
     manual pages of part(8) and controller(4).  Start  part  and  select  the
     disk  that  you  want  to  install MINIX onto.  In our example it will be
     /dev/c0d0.

     Use part to make a single partition in the  primary  partition  table  of
     type  "MINIX",  then hit '>' on this new partition to make a subpartition
     table.

     For the root subpartition you are advised to use 1440  kb  exactly.   You
     can  make  it larger if you want to, but it is advisable never to let the
     contents outgrow a floppy.  (The ROOT diskette is a copy of a  root  file
     system, and will be used to fill your root subpartition.)

     The second subpartition is for swapspace.  You can use it to enlarge  the
     amount of total memory (real + swap) if your system has less than 2M (16-
     bit mode) or 4M (32-bit mode).  Note that only one MINIX  swap  partition
     is needed on your system, so if you have another MINIX partition then you
     can use its swap partition instead.



                                                                             4



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


     Use the rest of the partition for s2, the /usr subpartition.

     When you are done check that /dev/c0d0p1s0 is active  (the  *  after  the
     partition number) so you can boot from it later.

     If your disk has bad blocks then don't put the root or swap  subpartition
     on top of them.  Make sure the inode tables in the other partitions don't
     have bad blocks either.  You can put the subpartitions out  of  order  on
     the  disk  if that helps.  Subpartition tables, unlike the main partition
     table, are not sorted by the driver.

     After making the partitions you do not have to reboot.  The  disk  driver
     reloads  the  partition  tables  on the next access if the disk is not in
     use.  (Open or mounted.)

     To be able to boot from /dev/c0d0p1s0 you must place a  master  bootstrap
     in  /dev/c0d0p1.  It has been placed there by part if it told you that it
     was creating a new partition table, but

          installboot -m /dev/c0d0p1 /usr/mdec/masterboot

     will put it there for sure.

     Let's start by initializing the swap partition first,  if  you  allocated
     one.  We may need it already, so mount it.

          mkswap /dev/c0d0p1s1
          mount -s /dev/c0d0p1s1

     Next make a file system for on-disk /usr and copy the floppy /usr  on  to
     it.

          mkfs /dev/c0d0p1s2
          readall -b /dev/c0d0p1s2 | sh
          mount /dev/c0d0p1s2 /mnt
          cpdir -v /usr /mnt

     This will create a file system on /dev/c0d0p1s2, mount it  on  /mnt,  and
     copy  the  contents of the USR floppy onto it.  The call to readall marks
     bad blocks on the file system as unusable, you can omit this on  a  drive
     known to be spotless (IDE or SCSI.)

     You can now use the new /usr in place of the USR floppy:

          umount /dev/c0d0p1s2
          umount /dev/fd0         # fd0p2 if combined
          mount /dev/c0d0p1s2 /usr





                                                                             5



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


     This little dance has freed up your floppy drive, so  please  remove  the
     USR diskette and replace it by the ROOT diskette.  Make a file system for
     the root with at least 512 inodes (files), and fill it from the floppy:

          mkfs -i 512 /dev/c0d0p1s0
          mount /dev/fd0 /fd0
          mount /dev/c0d0p1s0 /mnt
          cpdir -v /fd0 /mnt
          umount /dev/fd0

     Remove /mnt/etc/issue to get rid of the "use setup" message  that  greets
     you  when  you boot, and edit the file /mnt/etc/fstab to name the devices
     MINIX has been installed on.  In our example it should look like this:

          root=/dev/c0d0p1s0
          swap=/dev/c0d0p1s1
          usr=/dev/c0d0p1s2

     Unmount the new root:

          umount /dev/c0d0p1s0

     Make it bootable:

          installboot -d /dev/c0d0p1s0 /usr/mdec/bootblock boot

     The automatic script would now  set  the  rootdev  and  ramimagedev  boot
     variables.   You  can  do  this now using the edparams command, but it is
     easier to postpone it until the testing phase.  The settings should be:

          rootdev=c0d0p1s0
          ramimagedev=c0d0p1s0

  7. TESTING
     By now a new MINIX system is present on your hard disk.  Time to  see  if
     it  works.   Leave the ROOT diskette in the drive and type halt.  You are
     now going to use the power of the Boot Monitor on the  diskette  to  boot
     the  MINIX  partition  on  the  hard  disk.  Use the monitor command boot
     c0d0p1 to boot the primary partition MINIX has been installed in.  (It is
     "c0d0p1" in our example.)

     The hard disk bootstrap is now showing the menu again.  You can type  '='
     to start MINIX, but you probably want to change the boot parameters.  Hit
     ESC once more to get to the command prompt.  The command set  shows  what
     the  current parameters are.  Here is an example that shows how to make a
     menu to either start MINIX or boot Windows:

          minix(=,Minix) boot
          win(w,Windows) boot c0d0p0
          save


                                                                             6



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


     Windows is assumed to be in the first  partition  in  the  example  above
     (c0d0p0).  When finished type menu to see if the menu looks right.  If so
     hit '=' to start MINIX.  Log in as root.

  8. ADDING PROGRAMS AND SOURCES TO /usr
     The setup command can also be used to add files from floppy sets  to  the
     system.   The USR.TAZ (programs and stuff), SYS.TAZ (system sources), and
     CMD.TAZ (commands  sources)  are  all  installed  relative  to  the  /usr
     directory, so the command to use three times is

          setup /usr

     Setup will ask for the size of data on the floppies, which is by  default
     simply  the  entire  floppy.   You  will see some "Cannot make directory"
     errors while extracting, as some directories already exist.  Ignore these
     messages.   You  need the USR.TAZ set if you want a working MINIX system,
     SYS.TAZ if you want recompile the system or study it, and CMD.TAZ if  you
     also  want  the sources of the commands.  On a disk space starved machine
     you could opt to do  without  the  commands  sources,  as  they  are  not
     absolutely necessary to understand MINIX.

     If your machine does not have enough memory to run setup /usr  then  type
     these commands manually:

          cd /usr
          vol /dev/fd0 | zcat | tar xvfp -

     If USR.TAZ is already present on the hard  disk  in  an  DOS  or  Windows
     partition, then this command can be used under MINIX-386 to extract it to
     avoid the floppy detour:

          cd /usr
          mtools copy c0d0p0:USR.TAZ - | setup /usr

     In 16-bit mode you don't have mtools, but maybe dosread will work:

          cd /usr
          dosread c0d0p0 USR.TAZ | setup /usr

     The file doesn't have to be in the root directory of c0d0p0,  of  course,
     c0d1p0:/TMP/USR.TAZ  would  name  a  file  on  the first partition of the
     second hard disk in the directory \TMP.

     The /usr file system can also be filled through a network from  a  remote
     host  if  MINIX  if  you  can  get  networking  going  with  the  NET.TAZ
     supplement.  Use setup / to install NET.TAZ (note that  it  goes  into  /
     instead  of  /usr),  then follow the instructions in boot(8) to configure
     TCP/IP and boot MINIX.  There are now two ways to fill /usr.  One  is  to
     add  the  host  name and login name of a remote host and a remote user to
     /.rhosts, as root, and to use the following command on the remote host:


                                                                             7



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


          rsh -l root minix-box setup /usr < USR.TAZ

     Two is to use urlget to copy the data directly from a Web or FTP site  by
     using these commands under MINIX:

          cd /usr
          urlget url.../USR.TAZ | setup /usr

     The sources may be installed using exactly the same  commands,  but  with
     USR.TAZ  replaced by SRC.TAZ.  Note that this means that the sources must
     also be extracted relative to /usr.

  9. NAMES
     A standalone machine will have to be given a name.  As root type

          echo name >/etc/hostname.file

     to change the host name of your machine to name.

  10. ACTIVE ON BOOT
     You  may  want  to  make  the  MINIX  partition  active  so  that  it  is
     automatically booted.  With Windows fdisk or MINIX part, mark the primary
     partition that contains MINIX active.  Using the menu  you  made  earlier
     you  can  boot  either  MINIX or Windows at a keypress.  You can even set
     timeouts.  To boot MINIX automatically after 5 seconds:

          main() {trap 5000 minix; menu}

     See monitor(8) for all the details on the monitor.

     If you don't trust this then you can rig up a  diskette  that  boots  the
     MINIX partition when left in the drive:

          installboot -m /dev/fd0 /usr/mdec/jumpboot 010

     The numbers 010 indicate the device (disk  or  partition)  that  must  be
     booted,  i.e.   /dev/c0d0p1s0  in  this  example.   Take  the name of the
     device, and use the disk, partition and subpartition  numbers,  or  less.
     So c0d1p2s0 -> 120, c0d3 -> 3, c0d2p0 -> 20.)

  11. DEVICES
     A crash course on the MINIX devices in /dev:  The first  two  hard  disks
     are  named  c0d0  and  c0d1.  These devices address the entire hard disk,
     from the first to the last byte.  Each disk has four partitions, for disk
     0  they  are c0d0p0, c0d0p1, c0d0p2, and c0d0p3.  And for disk 1 they are
     named c0d1p0 to c0d1p3.   These  partitions  may  contain  file  systems,
     c0d0p0  often contains the MS-DOS or Windows "C:" file system.  MINIX can
     use these partitions for file systems too, but you can also partition one
     of  these  "primary partitions" into four so-called "subpartitions".  The
     subpartitions of c0d0p0  are  named  c0d0p0s0,  c0d0p0s1,  c0d0p0s2,  and


                                                                             8



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


     c0d0p0s3.  The other partitions may  have  four  subpartitions  that  are
     named in the same way.  See controller(4) for an elaborate description.

     You may need to add devices to /dev, because not all devices are  present
     to keep down the clutter.  The command MAKEDEV knows how to make devices,
     and DESCRIBE can tell you what an unknown device may be, or even what all
     devices  in  /dev  may  be  if  called  without  arguments.   Devices are
     described in dev(4), with pointers to more specific pages.

  12. EDITORS
     The editors available are elvis  (a  vi  clone),  elle  (a  simple  emacs
     clone),  and the old MINIX mined editor.  Of these editors only elvis can
     recover your file after a system  crash.   Only  mined  is  available  at
     installation  time.   (All you need to know about mined right now is that
     CTRL-X gets you out of it.)

  13. BOOT MONITOR VS. MINIX
     The Boot Monitor uses the BIOS to address disks, so it  has  no  idea  of
     controllers,  it  just  lumps  everything together and ignores controller
     numbers.  So what the monitor thinks are d0, d1, and d2, may be c0d0 (IDE
     primary  master),  c0d2  (IDE  secondary  master), and c1d3 (SCSI disk at
     target 3).  One must keep this in mind when MINIX is installed on a  disk
     other  than  the  very  first.   So  if  MINIX  is installed in the third
     partition  of  the  SCSI  disk,  then  boot  d2p2  will  boot   it,   and
     rootdev=c1d3p2s0 will tell MINIX where its root file system is.

  14. NATIONAL KEYBOARDS
     The  directory  /usr/lib/keymaps  contains  keymap  tables  for   several
     national keyboards.  If you have a German keyboard for instance, then

          loadkeys /usr/lib/keymaps/german.map

     will load the German key translation  table  into  the  keyboard  driver.
     Copy  the  map  to  /etc/keymap once MINIX is installed on the hard disk,
     because having to type a key sequence like one of these:

          loadkezs -usr-lib-kezmaps-german.map
          loqdkeys =usr=lib=key,qps=french.,qp

     on a reboot gets a bit annoying after a while.  Send corrections and  new
     keymaps  to  the  person  named  below.  (Do not send a Dutch keymap, buy
     yourself a real keyboard instead.)

SUGGESTIONS
     Below are a few useful suggestions.  Some of the information  can  be  of
     use in other situations than described here.






                                                                             9



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


  15. VIRTUAL CONSOLES
     Hold down the ALT key and press the left or right arrow key, F1,  or  F2.
     This  switches  the console between two login sessions.  (Unless you have
     an old mono adapter, because virtual consoles sit in video memory, and  a
     mono adapter only has memory for one.)

     Note that kernel messages, including function key output, only appear  on
     the  first  console.   This  may  be  confusing,  but  it keeps the other
     consoles clean.

  16. LOW ON MEMORY
     The normal installation requires that you have enough memory for a  large
     RAM disk.  You can still install MINIX normally if you either have a high
     density diskette drive for a combined root+usr floppy, or  you  have  two
     floppy  drives  of  at  least 720 kb.  Before booting you have to set the
     variable rootdev to the same value as ramimagedev.  This is slower then a
     RAM disk, but saves a lot of memory.

     The automatic installation script knows how to handle this new situation.
     If you install manually then you have to use

          cpdir -vx / /mnt

     to copy the root device to disk.  When it is time to fill  /usr  and  you
     only  have  one  floppy drive then hit DEL to get out of the installation
     script and reboot as described in "TESTING".  You  can  then  finish  the
     installation manually.

  17. LOW ON MEMORY AND ONLY ONE 720 KB FLOPPY DRIVE
     If you only have one 720 kb floppy drive and your system is low on memory
     then  you  can  use  the  TINYROOT.MNX boot image.  This image contains a
     small kernel with only the BIOS  disk  driver,  and  a  small  root  file
     system.   You  can  use  this  disk to boot your machine.  Use the normal
     ROOT.MNX to install the root file system.  Keep booting your machine with
     TINYROOT until you have compiled a small kernel for your system.  Use the
     rootdev boot variable to select the hard disk root file system.   Do  not
     use  TINYROOT  for  anything  other  than  booting,  always use ROOT when
     mentioned.

  18. FLOPPY DRIVE 1 IS A HIGH DENSITY DRIVE
     If you would like to install from floppy drive 1 then you need to copy at
     least one sector from the USR image onto a diskette for drive 0.  The USR
     bootstrap has been rigged to boot the other drive.

  19. INSTALLING ON A SECOND HARD DISK
     MINIX doesn't care if it is installed on the second disk of a system with
     two  disks.  The only problem is to get it booted.  You can either rig up
     a diskette to boot MINIX as shown earlier, or you can use the same  trick
     on the first disk.  The command



                                                                            10



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


          installboot -m /dev/c0d0 /usr/mdec/jumpboot 1

     will lock the first disk into booting the second disk.   Note  that  this
     command modifies the disk outside a MINIX partition, overwriting a bit of
     code that has likely been put there by Windows fdisk.  First verify  that
     the  Boot  Monitor  can  boot a Windows partition, because then the MINIX
     master bootstrap can do it too.

  20. LOTS OF MEMORY ON A 286
     You will have a hard time making MINIX use up 3 MB  memory.   Memory  you
     can  spare  can be used for a "second level block cache" on the RAM disk.
     The File System uses the second level  cache  to  store  copies  of  disk
     blocks that are pushed out of the normal (primary) block cache.  The size
     of the primary cache is compiled into the FS server, but the size of  the
     second  level cache can be set with the ramsize boot variable.  Set it to
     a number between 0 and 512.  512 kilobytes is enough to keep most of  the
     compiler cached.

  21. LOTS OF MEMORY ON A 386+
     Processes can be as big as you would like on a 386, but in practice 4  MB
     is a lot, and 8 MB is infinite.  The installation script sets up a second
     level cache for MINIX-386 of up to 1024 kilobytes.  This is  because  the
     default  file system cache is only 80 kb.  Your first point of call is to
     get  rid  of  the  poorly  performing  second  level  cache  by   setting
     ENABLE_CACHE2  to  0  and  to  assign the memory used by it to the normal
     block  cache  by  enlarging  the  appropriate  NR_BUFS  and   NR_BUF_HASH
     constants  in  <minix/config.h> with as much as you can spare.  (1024 for
     NR_BUFS is the minimum to keep cc -c cached.  2048 is then a  nice  value
     for  NR_BUF_HASH.)  Disable the second level cache, compile a new kernel,
     reboot and set ramsize to 0.

  22. LOTS OF DISK SPACE
     The maximum file system size is 1 GB for MINIX-386 and 128 MB for  MINIX-
     86.   (MINIX-86  can  handle  larger  file  systems, but fsck can't check
     them.)  Note that a MINIX file  system  can  only  contain  65535  inodes
     (files),  so  the average file should be 16 kb to completely fill it.  It
     may be better to make two smaller  file  systems.   Besides,  fsck  takes
     forever on a large file system.

SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION
     The system has been set up with the idea that working as root  is  a  bad
     thing  to  do.   As  root  you  are in no way protected from doing stupid
     things.  So don't do development as root,  but  work  as  bin!   Only  in
     exceptional  cases  do  you  want  to become root.  Being root is fun for
     wannabe hackers; administrators know better.

     To make life easier for bin, some programs  like  su(1),  install(1)  and
     shutdown(8)  treat bin and other members of the operator group as special
     and allow them the privileges of root.  (One  is  an  operator  if  one's
     group id is zero.)  Operators should share the shadow password of root by


                                                                            11



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


     having ##root in their password field.  This way they all have  one  face
     (password)  to  the  outside world, forming no greater security risk than
     root alone.

     The home directory of bin contains one important Makefile.  You  can  use
     it  to recompile all the commands and libraries of the system.  Type make
     to see the usage message.  If you want to compile just one  command  then
     you  can  simply  type  make to do so.  To put it in its proper place you
     have to type make install.  Read the Makefiles in the  commands  and  lib
     subdirectories  to understand how everything is put together.  If you are
     tight on memory then make may fail to traverse down the source  tree  and
     also  compile  things.   You will have to type make in each subdirectory.
     You can run make in /usr/src at the end to see if you've missed something
     or not.

     The shell used by MINIX is a minimal version of ash, the BSD  shell.   It
     has  been  modified  to  offer  simple line editing using the editline(3)
     library.

     The kernel is not compiled from the  master  Makefile.   To  make  a  new
     kernel you have to step into the tools directory.  There you can run four
     different make commands:

     make This makes all the different kernel parts and combines them  in  the
          file named image.

     make fdboot
          As above and then makes a boot floppy that you can  use  to  restart
          your system with.  You are prompted for the floppy device name.

     make hdboot
          First makes the image file and then copies  it  into  the  directory
          /minix.   If there are already two images in that directory then the
          newest image will be removed to make space for this newer image.  It
          is  assumed  that  the oldest image is the most stable system image,
          one that always works, and that the newest  image  is  experimental.
          Check  beforehand  what  /minix contains before you run make hdboot.
          Remove the oldest image if you want  another  image  to  become  the
          stable  image.   The Boot Monitor chooses the newest image in /minix
          to boot.  You can use the monitor  command  ls  minix  to  view  the
          images  present,  and set the image variable to the full name of the
          image you want to use instead  if  the  newest  doesn't  work.   The
          images  in  /minix  are  named  using  the MINIX release and version
          numbers with an extra  revision  number  added  to  distinguish  the
          images.

     The first new kernel you would like to make is one  configured  for  your
     system.   The  kernel  you  are  running now contains several drivers you
     don't  need,  or  may  be  missing  drivers  that  you  might  want.   In
     <minix/config.h>  you  can find a number of ENABLE_XXX variables that can


                                                                            12



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


     be set to 0 to exclude, or 1 to include a particular  driver.   The  full
     list  of  configurable  parameters  and  what  they  do  are described in
     config(8).  It is invaluable in figuring out what to change  and  how  in
     <minix/config.h>.

     Configuring a new kernel is sometimes not enough to enable  new  devices,
     you sometimes need to use the MAKEDEV command to make new device files in
     /dev.  For pseudo-ttys you also have to check  if  /etc/ttytab  mentiones
     the new devices.

     New additions to the system can be made in the /usr/local tree.  An empty
     directory  tree has been set up for you and binaries and manual pages are
     already in the search paths.  You can make a  new  user  entry  with  the
     adduser command.

     The TZ variable in /etc/profile tells the time zone offset from the  wall
     clock  time  to  GMT.   You  have  to change it for your time zone.  (See
     TZ(5).)

     The function keys produce debug dumps, showing various  interesting  data
     about  the system.  F1 lists processes and F5 shows ethernet stats, which
     may be of use now.  Read console(4) to know all the details of the screen
     and keyboard.

  23. SYSTEM SHUTDOWN
     You can't just turn a MINIX system off.  MINIX must be told to flush  the
     modified   data   in   the   file  system  cache  first.   The  following
     commands/keystrokes can be used to exit MINIX properly:

     shutdown
          First alert all users  and  then  all  processes  of  the  impending
          shutdown then halt or reboot the system in one of various ways.  See
          shutdown(8).

     reboot / halt
          Alert all processes of the system shutdown then reboot or halt.

     CTRL-ALT-DEL
          Halt the system by running shutdown -h now.

     MINIX  halts  by  returning  to  the  Boot  Monitor,  MINIX  reboots   by
     instructing  the monitor to reboot MINIX.  (MINIX is just a subprocess to
     the monitor.)  Either halt MINIX  and  use  monitor  commands  to  escape
     MINIX, or use shutdown -R to reset the system.

     When exiting MINIX running under DOS the Boot Monitor's exit command will
     return  you  to  the DOS prompt.  The Boot Monitor and MINIX are together
     just a pretty big DOS program as far DOS is concerned.




                                                                            13



USAGE(8)                  Minix Programmer's Manual                   USAGE(8)


FILES

     /usr/ast    Honorary home directory of Andrew S. Tanenbaum.   Doubles  as
                 the place where the default setup for a new user is found.

SEE ALSO
     dosminix(8),  monitor(8),  boot(8),  part(8),  mkfs(1),  mount(8),  M(8),
     fstab(5),  hier(7),  config(8),  console(4),  dev(4),  adduser(8), TZ(5),
     mkdist(8), shutdown(8).
     "Operating  Systems  -  Design  and  Implementation  2/e"  by  Andrew  S.
     Tanenbaum and Albert S. Woodhull.

NOTES
     The  notation  <file.h>  refers  to  a  C  language   include   file   in
     /usr/include.

     Root and bin do not have the current directory in  their  program  search
     path  to  avoid executing programs left around by malicious people.  This
     means that to run foo from the current directory, ./foo must be typed.

BUGS
     There are many PS/2 models, all different.  Some  will  run  MINIX,  some
     won't,  some  crippled  if  you  lie to MINIX by setting processor to 86.
     Almost no PS/2 has a standard disk, so setting c0 to esdi or bios will be
     necessary.

     Except for the floppy driver, none of the DMA based  drivers  know  about
     DMA  being  limited to a 24 bits address, i.e. the first 16 MB.  So under
     MINIX-386 you run a slight risk that a tar or dd command may use a buffer
     above  16  MB  for  reading  or writing to a character device.  This only
     happens if the low 16 MB is taken by some huge processes,  and  you  have
     more than 16 MB, of course.

AUTHOR
     Kees J. Bot <kjb@cs.vu.nl>

















                                                                            14

